---
title: Nan
date: 2023-12-18
---

It’s interesting to try to piece together the little parts or components leading up to a specific event. I remember that on the day my Nan fell over, we had been visiting my Uncle’s car dealership. I don’t remember why I was with my grandparents that day, though I remember that it was fairly cold, making it Spring or August. It was also light out, so it was either in the morning or the afternoon. My grandparents wouldn’t have taken me out for lunch - we would have stayed in and had that macaroni cheese from a tin. I wish I knew whether we’d already eaten, or we’d gone out before lunch.

It was just the three of us that day - Nan, Grandad and me. I believe I was in my early teens. My nan would often take me, especially when I was off school, while my parents worked. I’m not sure why we visited Dan’s garage, since my uncle Dan was only their son-in-law.

Did people used to visit extended family like this? Do they still do? I wonder if I’ll ever really know what normal people do, or have the chance to live in their way. Even when I sit at a café and listen to people’s conversations, I feel like I’m watching a scripted show or performance. Normal human interactions seem so unnatural to me, like the topic of their conversation is pre-decided - and I guess, in a way, it is. My own family or friend interactions seem so much more real to me, but maybe others would feel the same way if they listen to them.

When I talk to my uncle Dan, it’s a very strained and difficult interaction, at least for me. It’s like we’re talking two different languages. It’s like this when I talk to any of my family - like I’ve learned their language, but never had a chance to speak it with a real human before. I feel like I’m missing so much of the context. And I think I’ve always felt that way - as a kid, I lacked the understanding of what adults talked about (but also lacked the awareness to know that). As an adult, it’s much worse. I don’t understand it any more than I used to, but now I’m aware of it - and surely he’s aware of it too. Not only is there the added awareness; there’s also the added expectation. It puts me on edge, constantly. I miss the days when I was aloof to the expectations and impressions of others.

I remember really liking my Uncle Dan, but I also remember having a faint feeling of something amiss about him. Maybe I’m conflating different times, different ages. Maybe there was a shift in my feelings, sometime around age 13 or 14. I wonder if it’s normal for people to start reevaluating their feelings about others around that age. Honestly, now I don’t have a relationship with my Uncle at all. I do wonder what it would be like to choose a relative and just put all my love and energy behind rekindling a relationship with them. But what advantage would that bring me? I could pick any human being on this planet and do the same thing, and although I know it would better suit the expectations of my family and my society at large, I often feel like that’s exactly why I shouldn’t do it.

It’s one of those outdoor dealerships. It was on a corner, and open to the street on two sides. It had about 10-15 cars out front, mostly dusty old bangers, and a horrible pre-fabricated unit at the back. It had a small, cold office and a disgusting toilet that probably hadn’t been cleaned in months. Behind the building was the usual selection of old tires, tools, scrap metal and other rubbish that technically wasn’t fly-tipping because it was his own land. There was a chicken-wire-style fence round the back, just before a verge that dropped down into a stream (also full of rubbish). I can’t remember whether I played around the rubbish round back, or crawled down through a gap in the fence to the stream, but that’s definitely where I used to go to play. And on this day, the hose pipe snaked all around the dealership, mainly around the front. In a big business, there would be a cover on the hose with yellow stripes and warning signs - but not here. I assume the hose was there for cleaning the cars, and I believe Dan had an assistant to do that kind of manual work.

I never had an interest in cars, but it was kind of cool that my relative ran his own business. He was the only person in my family that did. My parents and their siblings grew were born around the 1960s, which means that they started off their careers in the ‘80s and ‘90s. This is the most affluent generation in our country, and even many who were born into quite poor families like mine were able to ascend to a newly emerging middle class by working in the new corporate industries that were really growing at that time. Out of my Mum’s siblings, Dan was the one who started a business (a good investment; when will people stop buying cars?), Hazel went into corporate life, and Paul was the wildcard, inventing new products, starting cottage businesses, selling arts and crafts and having affairs. They’re all now comfortably middle-class, and have the kinds of conversations in cafés that seem like performances to me. There’s also Nigel, my Mum’s other brother, whom we never speak about and I haven’t seen since my Dad’s 40 birthday party, which is 20 years ago now.

So I was happy to go there and play. That’s why I wonder if it was my idea to go there, or if I planted the seed of the idea that led to us going. For a pair of retirees, all it takes is a thought, and then my Grandad could say “that’s a thought - we could go round Danny’s today”, and my Nan could say “oh aye, we could”. And that’s that.

The most fascinating thing is that I remember some of my thoughts from that day. I remember specifically thinking about my brother, who had quite recently cut his thumb quite badly with a craft knife. I remember his thumb hanging off, but I imagine that’s because he had made this claim. I don’t think I ever actually saw the injury before it was bandaged up at the hospital. I remember thinking about it at the garage, though I think it had probably been a few months or a year since it had happened. I remember that I was at the front of the lot when I thought about this, and maybe it had been triggered by the rusty, sharp pieces of metal that I’d seen just before, round the back.

I also have a very abstract image of the scene round the back. The twisted, broken old fence down to the river. It had concrete pillars every 5-6 feet across. Patches of long, anaemic grass poking out of the concrete floor. I’m not sure if I can trust this at all, though; we’ve all seen these scenes (especially having grown up in a post-industrial city in Northern England), so I could be conflating things again. But something tells me that the fence and the stream are just as I remember. I suspect that I was really interested in the stream, which also makes me think I may not have been able to get down there, or been too afraid, after all.

All of this is to say that I think it may have been my fault when my Nan came to look for me around the back of the building, tripped on the hose, cut her knee and started crying. She was old, and had sensitive skin. She was wearing a dress at this time, and had nothing to protect her knee.

I’d never seen my Nan crying before, and I’m not sure many people had. Women of her age, from Yorkshire, did not cry. They were warriors, and fought daily for their lives and their families. I’m incredibly proud and thankful to my Nan, and always have been, for being a woman and a Mum in a time when it was a thankless life (not that she had any choice). But it was also a time when people had learned not to show their feelings, considering it a weakness, especially in front of children. My Nan hid her face, turned and walked away. If I’d been a little younger, I may not have noticed or understood what she was doing, but I definitely understood. I was shocked by what I saw; I thought it was impossible for my Nan to experience pain.

I never saw my Nan in pain again, at least not until the last years. She wore her dementia in the same way she’d worn her pain throughout her life. She found ways to hide and disguise her confusion, though dementia is a constant spiral, and her ability to cover her condition up reduced over time. I finally saw her true weakness when she finally opened up to me about her son Nigel, and how he made her feel. There was a small window in the advancement of dementia when my Nan had a good awareness of her own story, but little awareness of who she was talking to and what was appropriate, when she would tell me more than she ever had. I was thrilled to hear these stories, but also sad to know how ashamed she would have been to have told me them.

At this time, I was reminded of when my Nan fell over and cut her knee. When age and pain proved too much of an obstacle to her sense of propriety, and I caught a glimpse of a crack in the wall.

My Nan kept a powerful disguise for her whole life. Perhaps we could have been closer if she hadn’t. But at least, in a sense, she succeeded in her life goal to be the strong warrior-Mum until the very last years, showing barely a crack in the wall before then.

I think often about when my Nan fell over, and the events of the day beforehand. I can’t remember much of those events, and I’m surprised that I remember as much as this. As I recall it, and as I grow older, I wonder more and more if the entire incident revolved around me more than it revolved around her. I guess that’s what happens in our memories, as our recollection of an event fades and all we have left is our own reflections.
